Side by sideSide by side To see a recent photograph of this tomb of the Earl and Countess of Arundel that Larkin is describing, click here. , their faces blurred,   
The earl and countess lie in stone,   
Their proper habitshabits Clothes  vaguely shown   
As jointed armour, stiffened pleat,   
And that faint hint of the absurd—   
The little dogs under their feet. 

Such plainness of the pre-baroque pre-baroque In Larkin’s pronunciation, the phrase rhymes with 'shock.' The Baroque period, exemplified by ornamentation, followed the Renaissance. This tomb was sculpted in the Middle Ages.   
Hardly involves the eye, until 
It meets his left-hand gauntletgauntlet An armored glove, worn in the Middle Ages, still   
Clasped empty in the other; and   
One sees, with a sharp tender shock,   
His hand withdrawn, holding her hand. 

They would not think to lie so long.   
Such faithfulness in effigyeffigy A sculptured likeness 
Was just a detail friends would see: 
A sculptor’s sweet commissioned grace   
Thrown off in helping to prolong   
The Latin names around the base. 

They would not guess how early in 
Their supinesupine On their backs stationary voyage 
The air would change to soundless damage,   
Turn the old tenantry away; 
How soon succeeding eyes begin 
To look, not read. Rigidly they 

Persisted, linked, through lengths and breadths   
Of time. Snow fell, undated. Light 
Each summer thronged the glass. A bright   
Litter of birdcalls strewed the same 
Bone-riddled ground. And up the paths   
The endless altered people came, 

Washing at their identity.   
Now, helpless in the hollow of   
An unarmorial age, a trough 
Of smoke in slow suspended skeinsskeins Used figuratively, a skein is a quantity of thread    
Above their scrap of history,   
Only anOnly an When first published in June 1956 in the London Magazine, the line began: Only their attitude remains: 

Time has transfigured them into   
Untruth. The stone fidelity 
They hardly meant has come to be   
Their final blazonblazon Both a coat of arms, and a public proclamation, and to prove   
Our almost-instinct almost true:   
What will survive of us is love.
#END#
I work all day, and get half-drunk at night.   
Waking at four to soundless dark, I stare.   
In time the curtain-edges will grow light.   
Till then I see what’s really always there:   
Unresting death, a whole day nearer now,   
Making all thought impossible but how   
And where and when I shall myself die.   
Arid interrogation: yet the dread 
Of dying, and being dead, 
Flashes afresh to hold and horrify. 

The mind blanks at the glare. Not in remorse   
—The good not done, the love not given, time   
Torn off unused—nor wretchedly because   
An only life can take so long to climb 
Clear of its wrong beginnings, and may never;   
But at the total emptiness for ever, 
The sure extinction that we travel to 
And shall be lost in always. Not to be here,   
Not to be anywhere, 
And soon; nothing more terrible, nothing more true. 

This is a special way of being afraid 
No trick dispels. Religion used to try, 
That vast moth-eaten musical brocade 
Created to pretend we never die, 
And specious stuff that says No rational being  
Can fear a thing it will not feel, not seeing 
That this is what we fear—no sight, no sound,   
No touch or taste or smell, nothing to think with,   
Nothing to love or link with, 
The anaesthetic from which none come round. 

And so it stays just on the edge of vision,   
A small unfocused blur, a standing chill   
That slows each impulse down to indecision.   
Most things may never happen: this one will,   
And realisation of it rages out 
In furnace-fear when we are caught without   
People or drink. Courage is no good: 
It means not scaring others. Being brave   
Lets no one off the grave. 
Death is no different whined at than withstood. 

Slowly light strengthens, and the room takes shape.   
It stands plain as a wardrobe, what we know,   
Have always known, know that we can’t escape,   
Yet can’t accept. One side will have to go. 
Meanwhile telephones crouch, getting ready to ring   
In locked-up offices, and all the uncaring 
Intricate rented world begins to rouse. 
The sky is white as clay, with no sun. 
Work has to be done. 
Postmen like doctors go from house to house.
#END#
What are days for? 
Days are where we live.   
They come, they wake us   
Time and time over. 
They are to be happy in:   
Where can we live but days? 

Ah, solving that question 
Brings the priest and the doctor   
In their long coats 
Running over the fields.
#END#
‘Dockery was junior to you, 
Wasn’t he?’ said the Dean. ‘His son’s here now.’   
Death-suited, visitant, I nod. ‘And do 
You keep in touch with—’ Or remember how   
Black-gowned, unbreakfasted, and still half-tight   
We used to stand before that desk, to give   
‘Our version’ of ‘these incidents last night’?   
I try the door of where I used to live: 

Locked. The lawn spreads dazzlingly wide. 
A known bell chimes. I catch my train, ignored.   
Canal and clouds and colleges subside 
Slowly from view. But Dockery, good Lord,   
Anyone up today must have been born 
In ’43, when I was twenty-one. 
If he was younger, did he get this son 
At nineteen, twenty? Was he that withdrawn 

High-collared public-schoolboy, sharing rooms 
With Cartwright who was killed? Well, it just shows   
How much ... How little ... Yawning, I suppose 
I fell asleep, waking at the fumes 
And furnace-glares of Sheffield, where I changed,   
And ate an awful pie, and walked along   
The platform to its end to see the ranged   
Joining and parting lines reflect a strong 

Unhindered moon. To have no son, no wife,   
No house or land still seemed quite natural.   
Only a numbness registered the shock   
Of finding out how much had gone of life,   
How widely from the others. Dockery, now:   
Only nineteen, he must have taken stock 
Of what he wanted, and been capable 
Of ... No, that’s not the difference: rather, how 

Convinced he was he should be added to! 
Why did he think adding meant increase? 
To me it was dilution. Where do these 
Innate assumptions come from? Not from what   
We think truest, or most want to do: 
Those warp tight-shut, like doors. They’re more a style   
Our lives bring with them: habit for a while, 
Suddenly they harden into all we’ve got 

And how we got it; looked back on, they rear   
Like sand-clouds, thick and close, embodying   
For Dockery a son, for me nothing, 
Nothing with all a son’s harsh patronage.   
Life is first boredom, then fear. 
Whether or not we use it, it goes, 
And leaves what something hidden from us chose,   
And age, and then the only end of age.
#END#
Slowly the women file to where he stands   
Upright in rimless glasses, silver hair, 
Dark suit, white collar. Stewards tirelessly   
Persuade them onwards to his voice and hands,   
Within whose warm spring rain of loving care   
Each dwells some twenty seconds. Now, dear child, 
What’s wrong,
#END#
When I see a couple of kids 
And guess he’s fucking her and she’s   
Taking pills or wearing a diaphragm,   
I know this is paradise 

Everyone old has dreamed of all their lives—   
Bonds and gestures pushed to one side 
Like an outdated combine harvester, 
And everyone young going down the long slide 

To happiness, endlessly. I wonder if   
Anyone looked at me, forty years back,   
And thought, That’ll be the life; 
No God any more, or sweating in the dark
#END#
Love again: wanking at ten past three   
(Surely he’s taken her home by now?),   
The bedroom hot as a bakery, 
The drink gone dead, without showing how   
To meet tomorrow, and afterwards, 
And the usual pain, like dysentery. 

Someone else feeling her breasts and cunt,   
Someone else drowned in that lash-wide stare,   
And me supposed to be ignorant, 
Or find it funny, or not to care, 
Even ... but why put it into words? 
Isolate rather this element 

That spreads through other lives like a tree   
And sways them on in a sort of sense   
And say why it never worked for me.   
Something to do with violence 
A long way back, and wrong rewards,   
And arrogant eternity.
#END#
Quarterly, is it, money reproaches me: 
    ‘Why do you let me lie here wastefully? 
I am all you never had of goods and sex. 
    You could get them still by writing a few cheques.’ 

So I look at others, what they do with theirs:   
    They certainly don’t keep it upstairs. 
By now they’ve a second house and car and wife: 
    Clearly money has something to do with life 

—In fact, they’ve a lot in common, if you enquire: 
    You can’t put off being young until you retire, 
And however you bank your screw, the money you save 
    Won’t in the end buy you more than a shave. 

I listen to money singing. It’s like looking down 
    From long french windows at a provincial town,   
The slums, the canal, the churches ornate and mad 
    In the evening sun. It is intensely sad.
#END#
Groping back to bed after a piss 
I part thick curtains, and am startled by   
The rapid clouds, the moon’s cleanliness. 

Four o’clock: wedge-shadowed gardens lie   
Under a cavernous, a wind-picked sky.   
There’s something laughable about this, 

The way the moon dashes through clouds that blow   
Loosely as cannon-smoke to stand apart   
(Stone-coloured light sharpening the roofs below) 

High and preposterous and separate—   
Lozenge of love! Medallion of art! 
O wolves of memory! Immensements! No, 

One shivers slightly, looking up there. 
The hardness and the brightness and the plain   
Far-reaching singleness of that wide stare 

Is a reminder of the strength and pain   
Of being young; that it can’t come again,   
But is for others undiminished somewhere.
#END#
Come To Sunny Prestatyn 
Laughed the girl on the poster, 
Kneeling up on the sand   
In tautened white satin.   
Behind her, a hunk of coast, a 
Hotel with palms 
Seemed to expand from her thighs and   
Spread breast-lifting arms. 

She was slapped up one day in March.   
A couple of weeks, and her face 
Was snaggle-toothed and boss-eyed;   
Huge tits and a fissured crotch 
Were scored well in, and the space   
Between her legs held scrawls 
That set her fairly astride 
A tuberous cock and balls 

Autographed Titch Thomas, while   
Someone had used a knife 
Or something to stab right through   
The moustached lips of her smile.   
She was too good for this life.   
Very soon, a great transverse tear   
Left only a hand and some blue.   
Now Fight Cancer is there.
#END#
The mower stalled, twice; kneeling, I found   
A hedgehog jammed up against the blades,   
Killed. It had been in the long grass. 

I had seen it before, and even fed it, once.   
Now I had mauled its unobtrusive world   
Unmendably. Burial was no help: 

Next morning I got up and it did not. 
The first day after a death, the new absence   
Is always the same; we should be careful 

Of each other, we should be kind   
While there is still time.
#END#
That Whitsun, I was late getting away: 
    Not till about 
One-twenty on the sunlit Saturday 
Did my three-quarters-empty train pull out, 
All windows down, all cushions hot, all sense   
Of being in a hurry gone. We ran 
Behind the backs of houses, crossed a street 
Of blinding windscreens, smelt the fish-dock; thence   
The river’s level drifting breadth began, 
Where sky and Lincolnshire and water meet. 

All afternoon, through the tall heat that slept   
    For miles inland, 
A slow and stopping curve southwards we kept.   
Wide farms went by, short-shadowed cattle, and   
Canals with floatings of industrial froth;   
A hothouse flashed uniquely: hedges dipped   
And rose: and now and then a smell of grass   
Displaced the reek of buttoned carriage-cloth   
Until the next town, new and nondescript,   
Approached with acres of dismantled cars. 

At first, I didn’t notice what a noise 
    The weddings made 
Each station that we stopped at: sun destroys   
The interest of what’s happening in the shade, 
And down the long cool platforms whoops and skirls   
I took for porters larking with the mails,   
And went on reading. Once we started, though,   
We passed them, grinning and pomaded, girls   
In parodies of fashion, heels and veils,   
All posed irresolutely, watching us go, 

As if out on the end of an event 
    Waving goodbye 
To something that survived it. Struck, I leant   
More promptly out next time, more curiously,   
And saw it all again in different terms:   
The fathers with broad belts under their suits   
And seamy foreheads; mothers loud and fat;   
An uncle shouting smut; and then the perms,   
The nylon gloves and jewellery-substitutes,   
The lemons, mauves, and olive-ochres that 

Marked off the girls unreally from the rest.   
    Yes, from cafés 
And banquet-halls up yards, and bunting-dressed   
Coach-party annexes, the wedding-days   
Were coming to an end. All down the line 
Fresh couples climbed aboard: the rest stood round; 
The last confetti and advice were thrown, 
And, as we moved, each face seemed to define   
Just what it saw departing: children frowned   
At something dull; fathers had never known 

Success so huge and wholly farcical; 
    The women shared 
The secret like a happy funeral; 
While girls, gripping their handbags tighter, stared   
At a religious wounding. Free at last, 
And loaded with the sum of all they saw, 
We hurried towards London, shuffling gouts of steam.   
Now fields were building-plots, and poplars cast   
Long shadows over major roads, and for 
Some fifty minutes, that in time would seem 

Just long enough to settle hats and say 
    I nearly died,
#END#
They fuck you up, your mum and dad.   
    They may not mean to, but they do.   
They fill you with the faults they had 
    And add some extra, just for you. 

But they were fucked up in their turn 
    By fools in old-style hats and coats,   
Who half the time were soppy-stern 
    And half at one another’s throats. 

Man hands on misery to man. 
    It deepens like a coastal shelf. 
Get out as early as you can, 
    And don’t have any kids yourself.
#END#
My wife and I have asked a crowd of craps 
To come and waste their time and ours: perhaps   
You’d care to join us?
#END#
About twenty years ago 
Two girls came in where I worked— 
A bosomy English rose 
And her friend in specs I could talk to.   
Faces in those days sparked 
The whole shooting-match off, and I doubt   
If ever one had like hers: 
But it was the friend I took out, 

And in seven years after that   
Wrote over four hundred letters,   
Gave a ten-guinea ring 
I got back in the end, and met   
At numerous cathedral cities   
Unknown to the clergy. I believe 
I met beautiful twice. She was trying   
Both times (so I thought) not to laugh. 

Parting, after about five 
Rehearsals, was an agreement   
That I was too selfish, withdrawn,   
And easily bored to love. 
Well, useful to get that learnt.   
In my wallet are still two snaps 
Of bosomy rose with fur gloves on.   
Unlucky charms, perhaps.
#END#
