Those blessèd structures, plot and rhyme— 
why are they no help to me now 
I want to make 
something imagined, not recalled? 
I hear the noise of my own voice: 
The painter’s vision is not a lens, 
it trembles to caress the light.
#END#
An old man in Concord forgets to go to morning service. He falls asleep, while reading Vergil, and dreams that he is Aeneas at the funeral of Pallas, an Italian prince.
The sun is blue and scarlet on my page,   
And yuck-a, yuck-a, yuck-a, yuck-a, rage   
The yellowhammers mating. Yellow fire   
Blankets the captives dancing on their pyre, 
And the scorched lictor screams and drops his rod.   
Trojans are singing to their drunken God,   
Ares. Their helmets catch on fire. Their files   
Clank by the body of my comrade—miles   
Of filings! Now the scythe-wheeled chariot rolls   
Before their lances long as vaulting poles,   
And I stand up and heil the thousand men,   
Who carry Pallas to the bird-priest. Then   
The bird-priest groans, and as his birds foretold,   
I greet the body, lip to lip. I hold 
The sword that Dido used. It tries to speak,   
A bird with Dido’s sworded breast. Its beak   
Clangs and ejaculates the Punic word   
I hear the bird-priest chirping like a bird.   
I groan a little. “Who am I, and why?”   
It asks, a boy’s face, though its arrow-eye   
Is working from its socket. “Brother, try,   
O Child of Aphrodite, try to die: 
To die is life.” His harlots hang his bed 
With feathers of his long-tailed birds. His head   
Is yawning like a person. The plumes blow;   
The beard and eyebrows ruffle. Face of snow,   
You are the flower that country girls have caught,   
A wild bee-pillaged honey-suckle brought   
To the returning bridegroom—the design 
Has not yet left it, and the petals shine;   
The earth, its mother, has, at last, no help:   
It is itself. The broken-winded yelp 
Of my Phoenician hounds, that fills the brush   
With snapping twigs and flying, cannot flush   
The ghost of Pallas. But I take his pall,   
Stiff with its gold and purple, and recall   
How Dido hugged it to her, while she toiled,   
Laughing—her golden threads, a serpent coiled   
In cypress. Now I lay it like a sheet; 
It clinks and settles down upon his feet, 
The careless yellow hair that seemed to burn   
Beforehand. Left foot, right foot—as they turn,   
More pyres are rising: armored horses, bronze,   
And gagged Italians, who must file by ones   
Across the bitter river, when my thumb   
Tightens into their wind-pipes. The beaks drum; 
Their headman’s cow-horned death’s-head bites its tongue,   
And stiffens, as it eyes the hero slung 
Inside his feathered hammock on the crossed   
Staves of the eagles that we winged. Our cost   
Is nothing to the lovers, whoring Mars   
And Venus, father’s lover. Now his car’s   
Plumage is ready, and my marshals fetch   
His squire, Acoctes, white with age, to hitch   
Aethon, the hero’s charger, and its ears   
Prick, and it steps and steps, and stately tears   
Lather its teeth; and then the harlots bring   
The hero’s charms and baton—but the King,   
Vain-glorious Turnus, carried off the rest.   
“I was myself, but Ares thought it best   
The way it happened.” At the end of time,   
He sets his spear, as my descendants climb   
The knees of Father Time, his beard of scalps, 
His scythe, the arc of steel that crowns the Alps.   
The elephants of Carthage hold those snows,   
Turms of Numidian horse unsling their bows,   
The flaming turkey-feathered arrows swarm   
Beyond the Alps. “Pallas,” I raise my arm   
And shout, “Brother, eternal health. Farewell   
Forever.” Church is over, and its bell 
Frightens the yellowhammers, as I wake 
And watch the whitecaps wrinkle up the lake.   
Mother’s great-aunt, who died when I was eight,   
Stands by our parlor sabre. “Boy, it’s late.   
Vergil must keep the Sabbath.” Eighty years!   
It all comes back. My Uncle Charles appears.   
Blue-capped and bird-like. Phillips Brooks and Grant   
Are frowning at his coffin, and my aunt,   
Hearing his colored volunteers parade   
Through Concord, laughs, and tells her English maid   
To clip his yellow nostril hairs, and fold   
His colors on him. . . . It is I. I hold 
His sword to keep from falling, for the dust   
On the stuffed birds is breathless, for the bust   
Of young Augustus weighs on Vergil’s shelf:   
It scowls into my glasses at itself.
#END#
The old South Boston Aquarium stands
in a Sahara of snow now. Its broken windows are boarded. 
The bronze weathervane cod has lost half its scales.
The airy tanks are dry.

Once my nose crawled like a snail on the glass;
my hand tingled
to burst the bubbles
drifting from the noses of the cowed, compliant fish.

My hand draws back. I often sigh still
for the dark downward and vegetating kingdom
of the fish and reptile. One morning last March,
I pressed against the new barbed and galvanized

fence on the Boston Common. Behind their cage,
yellow dinosaur steamshovels were grunting 
as they cropped up tons of mush and grass
to gouge their underworld garage.

Parking spaces luxuriate like civic
sandpiles in the heart of Boston.
A girdle of orange, Puritan-pumpkin colored girders
braces the tingling Statehouse,

shaking over the excavations, as it faces Colonel Shaw
and his bell-cheeked Negro infantry
on St. Gaudens' shaking Civil War relief,
propped by a plank splint against the garage's earthquake.

Two months after marching through Boston,
half the regiment was dead;
at the dedication,
William James could almost hear the bronze Negroes breathe.
 
Their monument sticks like a fishbone
in the city's throat.
Its Colonel is as lean
as a compass-needle.

He has an angry wrenlike vigilance,
a greyhound's gentle tautness;
he seems to wince at pleasure,
and suffocate for privacy.

He is out of bounds now. He rejoices in man's lovely,
peculiar power to choose life and die—
when he leads his black soldiers to death,
he cannot bend his back.

On a thousand small town New England greens,
the old white churches hold their air
of sparse, sincere rebellion; frayed flags
quilt the graveyards of the Grand Army of the Republic.

The stone statues of the abstract Union Soldier
grow slimmer and younger each year—
wasp-waisted, they doze over muskets
and muse through their sideburns . . .

Shaw's father wanted no monument
except the ditch,
where his son's body was thrown
and lost with his "niggers."

The ditch is nearer.
There are no statues for the last war here;
on Boylston Street, a commercial photograph 
shows Hiroshima boiling

over a Mosler Safe, the "Rock of Ages"
that survived the blast. Space is nearer.
When I crouch to my television set,
the drained faces of Negro school-children rise like balloons.

Colonel Shaw
is riding on his bubble,
he waits
for the blessèd break.

The Aquarium is gone. Everywhere,
giant finned cars nose forward like fish;
a savage servility
slides by on grease.
#END#
The stiff spokes of this wheel 
touch the sore spots of the earth.  

On the Potomac, swan-white 
power launches keep breasting the sulphurous wave.  

Otters slide and dive and slick back their hair, 
raccoons clean their meat in the creek.  

On the circles, green statues ride like South American 
liberators above the breeding vegetation—  

prongs and spearheads of some equatorial 
backland that will inherit the globe.  

The elect, the elected . . . they come here bright as dimes, 
and die dishevelled and soft.  

We cannot name their names, or number their dates— 
circle on circle, like rings on a tree—  

but we wish the river had another shore, 
some further range of delectable mountains,  

distant hills powdered blue as a girl’s eyelid. 
It seems the least little shove would land us there,  

that only the slightest repugnance of our bodies 
we no longer control could drag us back.
#END#
Only teaching on Tuesdays, book-worming 
in pajamas fresh from the washer each morning, 
I hog a whole house on Boston’s 
“hardly passionate Marlborough Street,” 
where even the man 
scavenging filth in the back alley trash cans, 
has two children, a beach wagon, a helpmate, 
and is a “young Republican.” 
I have a nine months’ daughter, 
young enough to be my granddaughter. 
Like the sun she rises in her flame-flamingo infants’ wear. 

These are the tranquillized Fifties,
#END#
1922: the stone porch of my Grandfather’s summer house
I 
“I won’t go with you. I want to stay with Grandpa!”   
That’s how I threw cold water 
on my Mother and Father’s 
watery martini pipe dreams at Sunday dinner. 
... Fontainebleau, Mattapoisett, Puget Sound....   
Nowhere was anywhere after a summer 
at my Grandfather’s farm. 
Diamond-pointed, athirst and Norman, 
its alley of poplars 
paraded from Grandmother’s rose garden 
to a scary stand of virgin pine, 
scrub, and paths forever pioneering. 

One afternoon in 1922, 
I sat on the stone porch, looking through 
screens as black-grained as drifting coal. 
Tockytock, tockytock
#END#
The dream went like a rake of sliced bamboo, 
slats of dust distracted by a downdraw; 
I woke and knew I held a cigarette; 
I looked, there was none, could have been none; 
I slept off years before I woke again, 
palming the floor, shaking the sheets. I saw 
nothing was burning. I awoke, I saw 
I was holding two lighted cigarettes. . . . 
They come this path, old friends, old buffs of death. 
Tonight it’s Randall, his spark still fire though humble, 
his gnawed wrist cradled like Kitten. “What kept you so long, 
racing the cooling grindstone of your ambition? 
You didn’t write, you rewrote.... But tell me, 
Cal, why did we live? Why do we die?”
#END#
[February 1954]
Your nurse could only speak Italian, 
but after twenty minutes I could imagine your final week,   
and tears ran down my cheeks.... 

When I embarked from Italy with my Mother’s body,   
the whole shoreline of the Golfo di Genova  
was breaking into fiery flower. 
The crazy yellow and azure sea-sleds   
blasting like jack-hammers across 
the spumante-bubbling wake of our liner,   
recalled the clashing colors of my Ford.   
Mother traveled first-class in the hold;   
her Risorgimento black and gold casket   
was like Napoleon’s at the Invalides.... 

While the passengers were tanning   
on the Mediterranean in deck-chairs,   
our family cemetery in Dunbarton   
lay under the White Mountains 
in the sub-zero weather. 
The graveyard’s soil was changing to stone— 
so many of its deaths had been midwinter.   
Dour and dark against the blinding snowdrifts, 
its black brook and fir trunks were as smooth as masts. 
A fence of iron spear-hafts 
black-bordered its mostly Colonial grave-slates.   
The only “unhistoric” soul to come here   
was Father, now buried beneath his recent   
unweathered pink-veined slice of marble.   
Even the Latin of his Lowell motto:   
Occasionem cognosce,
#END#
(For Elizabeth Bishop)Dedication Lowell’s poem is modeled on Elizabeth Bishop’s poem “The Armadillo,” which Bishop had dedicated to Lowell.
Nautilus Island’sNautilus Island’s Lowell once remarked, “The first four stanzas are meant to give a dawdling more or less amiable picture of a declining Maine sea town.”  hermit
heiress still lives through winter in her Spartan cottage;
her sheep still graze above the sea.
Her son’s a bishop. Her farmer
is first selectman in our village;
she’s in her dotageshe’s in her dotage Echoes “the world is in its dotage”, from Oliver Goldsmith’s The Vicar of Wakefield (1766)..

Thirsting for
the hierarchic privacy
of Queen Victoria’s century,
she buys up all
the eyesores facing her shore,
and lets them fall.

The season’s ill—
we’ve lost our summer millionaire,
who seemed to leap from an L. L. Bean
catalogue. His nine-knot yawl
was auctioned off to lobstermen.
A red fox stain covers Blue HillA red fox stain covers Blue Hill Lowell wrote, “The red fox stain was merely meant to describe the rusty reddish color of autumn on Blue Hill, a Maine mountain near where we were living.”.

And now our fairy 
decorator brightens his shop for fall;
his fishnet’s filled with orange cork,
orange, his cobbler’s bench and awl;
there is no money in his work,
he’d rather marry.

One dark nightOne dark night Echoes The Dark Night of the Soul by St. John of the Cross, a Spanish mystic (1542-1591). In his talk “On ‘Skunk Hour,’” Lowell stated, "I hoped my readers would remember John of the Cross's poem. My night is not gracious, but secular, puritan, and agnostic. An existential night.” ,
my Tudor Ford climbed the hill’s skullhill’s skull "When they came to the place that is called The Skull, they crucified Jesus" (Luke: 23:33, NRSV). Both "Golgotha,” in Hebrew, and "Calvary," from Latin ("Calvaria") mean "skull".;
I watched for love-cars. Lights turned down, 
they lay together, hull to hull,
where the graveyard shelvesshelves Slopes down  on the town. . . .
My mind’s not right.

A car radio bleats,
“Love, O careless Love. . . .”“Love, O careless Love. . . . “A popular blues song of the time written by W.C. Handy and performed by Bessie Smith (1925), in which the narrator threatens to kill his or her wayward lover. The song was performed with slight variations of lyrics by many musicians before Lowell wrote this poem in 1959, including  Fats Domino  (1956).  I hear
my ill-spirit sob in each blood cell,
as if my hand were at its throat. . . .
I myself am hellI myself am hell An echo of Satan speaking in John Milton's Paradise Lost: “Which way I fly is Hell; myself am Hell” (Book 4, line 75);
nobody’s here—

only skunks, that search
in the moonlight for a bite to eat.
They march on their soles up Main Street:
white stripes, moonstruck eyes’ red fire
under the chalk-dry and sparspar Nautical term for a mast spire
of the Trinitarian Church.

I stand on top
of our back steps and breathe the rich air—
a mother skunk with her columncolumn Figuratively, a military formation  of kittens swills the garbage pail 
She jabs her wedge-head in a cup
of sour cream, drops her ostrich tail,
and will not scare.
#END#
[FOR WARREN WINSLOW, DEAD AT SEA]
Let man have dominion over the fishes of the sea and the fowls of the air and the beasts of the whole earth, and every creeping creature that moveth upon the earth. 
I 

A brackish reach of shoal off Madaket— 
The sea was still breaking violently and night   
Had steamed into our North Atlantic Fleet, 
When the drowned sailor clutched the drag-net. Light   
Flashed from his matted head and marble feet,   
He grappled at the net 
With the coiled, hurdling muscles of his thighs: 
The corpse was bloodless, a botch of reds and whites,   
Its open, staring eyes 
Were lustreless dead-lights 
Or cabin-windows on a stranded hulk   
Heavy with sand. We weight the body, close   
Its eyes and heave it seaward whence it came,   
Where the heel-headed dogfish barks its nose   
On Ahab’s void and forehead; and the name   
Is blocked in yellow chalk. 
Sailors, who pitch this portent at the sea   
Where dreadnaughts shall confess 
Its hell-bent deity, 
When you are powerless 
To sand-bag this Atlantic bulwark, faced 
By the earth-shaker, green, unwearied, chaste   
In his steel scales: ask for no Orphean lute 
To pluck life back. The guns of the steeled fleet   
Recoil and then repeat 
The hoarse salute. 


II 

Whenever winds are moving and their breath   
Heaves at the roped-in bulwarks of this pier,   
The terns and sea-gulls tremble at your death   
In these home waters. Sailor, can you hear   
The Pequod’s sea wings, beating landward, fall   
Headlong and break on our Atlantic wall   
Off ’Sconset, where the yawing S-boats splash   
The bellbuoy, with ballooning spinnakers,   
As the entangled, screeching mainsheet clears   
The blocks: off Madaket, where lubbers lash   
The heavy surf and throw their long lead squids   
For blue-fish? Sea-gulls blink their heavy lids   
Seaward. The winds’ wings beat upon the stones,   
Cousin, and scream for you and the claws rush   
At the sea’s throat and wring it in the slush   
Of this old Quaker graveyard where the bones   
Cry out in the long night for the hurt beast   
Bobbing by Ahab’s whaleboats in the East. 


III 

All you recovered from Poseidon died 
With you, my cousin, and the harrowed brine   
Is fruitless on the blue beard of the god,   
Stretching beyond us to the castles in Spain,   
Nantucket’s westward haven. To Cape Cod   
Guns, cradled on the tide, 
Blast the eelgrass about a waterclock 
Of bilge and backwash, roil the salt and sand   
Lashing earth’s scaffold, rock 
Our warships in the hand 
Of the great God, where time’s contrition blues   
Whatever it was these Quaker sailors lost 
In the mad scramble of their lives. They died   
When time was open-eyed, 
Wooden and childish; only bones abide 
There, in the nowhere, where their boats were tossed   
Sky-high, where mariners had fabled news   
Of IS, the whited monster. What it cost   
Them is their secret. In the sperm-whale’s slick   
I see the Quakers drown and hear their cry:   
“If God himself had not been on our side,   
If God himself had not been on our side,   
When the Atlantic rose against us, why,   
Then it had swallowed us up quick.” 


IV 

This is the end of the whaleroad and the whale 
Who spewed Nantucket bones on the thrashed swell   
And stirred the troubled waters to whirlpools   
To send the Pequod packing off to hell:   
This is the end of them, three-quarters fools,   
Snatching at straws to sail 
Seaward and seaward on the turntail whale,   
Spouting out blood and water as it rolls,   
Sick as a dog to these Atlantic shoals: 
Clamavimus, O depths. Let the sea-gulls wail 

For water, for the deep where the high tide   
Mutters to its hurt self, mutters and ebbs.   
Waves wallow in their wash, go out and out,   
Leave only the death-rattle of the crabs,   
The beach increasing, its enormous snout   
Sucking the ocean’s side. 
This is the end of running on the waves; 
We are poured out like water. Who will dance 
The mast-lashed master of Leviathans 
Up from this field of Quakers in their unstoned graves? 


V 

When the whale’s viscera go and the roll   
Of its corruption overruns this world 
Beyond tree-swept Nantucket and Woods Hole   
And Martha’s Vineyard, Sailor, will your sword   
Whistle and fall and sink into the fat? 
In the great ash-pit of Jehoshaphat 
The bones cry for the blood of the white whale,   
The fat flukes arch and whack about its ears,   
The death-lance churns into the sanctuary, tears   
The gun-blue swingle, heaving like a flail, 
And hacks the coiling life out: it works and drags   
And rips the sperm-whale’s midriff into rags,   
Gobbets of blubber spill to wind and weather,   
Sailor, and gulls go round the stoven timbers   
Where the morning stars sing out together 
And thunder shakes the white surf and dismembers   
The red flag hammered in the mast-head. Hide,   
Our steel, Jonas Messias, in Thy side. 


VI 

OUR LADY OF WALSINGHAM 

There once the penitents took off their shoes   
And then walked barefoot the remaining mile;   
And the small trees, a stream and hedgerows file   
Slowly along the munching English lane,   
Like cows to the old shrine, until you lose   
Track of your dragging pain. 
The stream flows down under the druid tree,   
Shiloah’s whirlpools gurgle and make glad   
The castle of God. Sailor, you were glad   
And whistled Sion by that stream. But see: 

Our Lady, too small for her canopy, 
Sits near the altar. There’s no comeliness   
At all or charm in that expressionless 
Face with its heavy eyelids. As before, 
This face, for centuries a memory, 
Non est species, neque decor, 
Expressionless, expresses God: it goes 
Past castled Sion. She knows what God knows,   
Not Calvary’s Cross nor crib at Bethlehem   
Now, and the world shall come to Walsingham. 


VII 

The empty winds are creaking and the oak   
Splatters and splatters on the cenotaph,   
The boughs are trembling and a gaff   
Bobs on the untimely stroke 
Of the greased wash exploding on a shoal-bell   
In the old mouth of the Atlantic. It’s well;   
Atlantic, you are fouled with the blue sailors,   
Sea-monsters, upward angel, downward fish:   
Unmarried and corroding, spare of flesh   
Mart once of supercilious, wing’d clippers,   
Atlantic, where your bell-trap guts its spoil   
You could cut the brackish winds with a knife   
Here in Nantucket, and cast up the time 
When the Lord God formed man from the sea’s slime   
And breathed into his face the breath of life,   
And blue-lung’d combers lumbered to the kill.   
The Lord survives the rainbow of His will.
#END#
Forty years ago we were here
where we are now,
the same erotic May-wind blew
the trees from there to here—

the same tang of metal in the mouth,
the dirt-pierced wood of Cambridge.

Sometimes
you are so much younger than your face,
I know I am seeing your old face—
the hampered Henry James
mockery of your stutter,
your daily fear of choking, dying— 
in school, loudness not words
gave character to the popular boy's voice.

We looked in the face of the other
for what we were.
Once in the common record heat
of June in Massachusetts,
we sat by the school pool
talking out the soul-lit night
and listened to the annual 
unsuffering voice of the tree frogs,
green, aimless and wakened:
“I want to write.” “I want to paint.”

Was it I wanted you to paint? . . .

Age is another species,
the nothing-voiced. The very old
made grandfather look vulgarly young,
when he drove me to feed them at their home.

We will have their thoughtful look,
as if uncertain
who had led our lives.

The past changes more than the present.

Wherever there's grass, there is pollen,
the asthma of high summer—
the inclination to drink, not eat . . .

“Let us go into the garden,
or shall I say the yard?”
Why have you said this twice, Frank?
The garden has no flowers,
or choice of color,
the thick wet clump of grass
thins to red clay,
like an Indian's shaved and tufted head,
or yours—
we once claimed alliance with the Redskin.
What is won by surviving,
if two glasses of red wine are poison?
#END#
