w(from The Tempest)
Full fathom five thy father lies;
#END#
(from Macbeth)
Double, double toil and trouble; 
Fire burn and caldron bubble. 
Fillet of a fenny snake, 
In the caldron boil and bake; 
Eye of newt and toe of frog, 
Wool of bat and tongue of dog, 
Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, 
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing, 
For a charm of powerful trouble, 
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble. 

Double, double toil and trouble; 
Fire burn and caldron bubble. 
Cool it with a baboon's blood, 
Then the charm is firm and good.
#END#
Blow, blow, thou winter wind, 
   Thou art not so unkind 
      As man’s ingratitude; 
   Thy tooth is not so keen, 
Because thou art not seen, 
      Although thy breath be rude. 
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly: 
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly: 
   Then, heigh-ho, the holly! 
      This life is most jolly.
#END#
(from Twelfth Night)
Come away, come away, death, 
    And in sad cypress let me be laid. 
Fly away, fly away, breath; 
    I am slain by a fair cruel maid. 
My shroud of white, stuck all with yew, 
             O, prepare it! 
My part of death, no one so true 
         Did share it. 

Not a flower, not a flower sweet, 
    On my black coffin let there be strown. 
Not a friend, not a friend greet 
    My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown. 
A thousand thousand sighs to save, 
             Lay me, O, where 
Sad true lover never find my grave, 
             To weep there!
#END#
(from Cymbeline)
Fear no more the heat o’ the sun, 
Nor the furious winter’s rages; 
Thou thy worldly task hast done, 
Home art gone, and ta’en thy wages: 
Golden lads and girls all must, 
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust. 

Fear no more the frown o’ the great; 
Thou art past the tyrant’s stroke; 
Care no more to clothe and eat; 
To thee the reed is as the oak: 
The scepter, learning, physic, must 
All follow this, and come to dust. 

Fear no more the lightning flash, 
Nor the all-dreaded thunder stone; 
Fear not slander, censure rash; 
Thou hast finished joy and moan: 
All lovers young, all lovers must 
Consign to thee, and come to dust. 

No exorciser harm thee! 
Nor no witchcraft charm thee! 
Ghost unlaid forbear thee! 
Nothing ill come near thee! 
Quiet consummation have; 
And renownèd be thy grave!
#END#
(from As You Like It)
It was a lover and his lass, 
   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, 
That o’er the green cornfield did pass, 
   In springtime, the only pretty ring time, 
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding; 
Sweet lovers love the spring
#END#
(from Henry VIII)
Orpheus with his lute made trees, 
And the mountain tops that freeze, 
Bow themselves when he did sing:
To his music plants and flowers 
Ever sprung; as sun and showers 
There had made a lasting spring. 
Every thing that heard him play, 
Even the billows of the sea, 
Hung their heads, and then lay by. 
In sweet music is such art, 
Killing care and grief of heart 
Fall asleep, or hearing, die.
#END#
(from Measure for Measure)
Take, oh take those lips away, 
      That so sweetly were forsworn, 
And those eyes: the breake of day, 
      Lights that do mislead the Morn; 
But my kisses bring again, bring again, 
Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.
#END#
(from The Tempest)
Where the bee sucks, there suck I: 
In a cowslip’s bell I lie; 
There I couch when owls do cry. 
On the bat’s back I do fly 
After summer merrily.   
Merrily, merrily shall I live now 
Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
#END#
(from Two Gentlemen of Verona)
Who is Silvia? what is she, 
    That all our swains commend her? 
Holy, fair, and wise is she; 
    The heaven such grace did lend her, 
That she might admirèd be. 

Is she kind as she is fair? 
    For beauty lives with kindness. 
Love doth to her eyes repair, 
    To help him of his blindness; 
And, being helped, inhabits there. 

Then to Silvia let us sing, 
    That Silvia is excelling; 
She excels each mortal thing 
    Upon the dull earth dwelling; 
 To her let us garlands bring
#END#
(from As You Like It)
Under the greenwood tree
Who loves to lie with me,
And turn his merry note
Unto the sweet bird's throat,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
            Here shall he see
            No enemy
But winter and rough weather.
#END#
(from Cymbeline)
Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings, 
And Phoebus 'gins arise, 
His steeds to water at those springs 
On chaliced flowers that lies; 
And winking Mary-buds begin 
To ope their golden eyes: 
With every thing that pretty is, 
My lady sweet, arise: 
Arise, arise.
#END#
(from Twelfth Night)
O Mistress mine where are you roaming? 
O stay and hear, your true love's coming, 
      That can sing both high and low. 
Trip no further pretty sweeting. 
Journeys end in lovers' meeting, 
      Every wise man's son doth know. 

What is love, 'tis not hereafter, 
Present mirth, hath present laughter: 
      What's to come, is still unsure. 
In delay there lies no plenty, 
Then come kiss me sweet and twenty: 
      Youth's a stuff will not endure.
#END#
(from Much Ado About Nothing)
Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more. 
    Men were deceivers ever, 
One foot in sea, and one on shore, 
    To one thing constant never. 
Then sigh not so, but let them go, 
    And be you blithe and bonny, 
Converting all your sounds of woe 
    Into hey nonny, nonny. 

Sing no more ditties, sing no more 
    Of dumps so dull and heavy. 
The fraud of men was ever so 
    Since summer first was leafy. 
Then sigh not so, but let them go, 
    And be you blithe and bonny, 
Converting all your sounds of woe 
    Into hey, nonny, nonny.
#END#
(from Love's Labors Lost)
When daisies pied and violets blue 
      And lady-smocks all silver-white 
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue 
      Do paint the meadows with delight, 
The cuckoo then, on every tree, 
Mocks married men; for thus sings he: 
                                                    “Cuckoo; 
Cuckoo, cuckoo!” O, word of fear, 
Unpleasing to a married ear! 

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws, 
      And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks, 
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws, 
      And maidens bleach their summer smocks, 
The cuckoo then, on every tree, 
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 
                                                    “Cuckoo; 
Cuckoo, cuckoo!” O, word of fear, 
Unpleasing to a married ear! 

When icicles hang by the wall, 
      And Dick the shepherd blows his nail, 
And Tom bears logs into the hall, 
      And milk comes frozen home in pail, 
When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul, 
Then nightly sings the staring-owl, 
                                                    “Tu-who; 
Tu-whit, tu-who!”—a merry note, 
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot. 

When all aloud the wind doth blow, 
      And coughing drowns the parson's saw, 
And birds sit brooding in the snow, 
      And Marian's nose looks red and raw, 
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl, 
Then nightly sings the staring owl, 
                                                    “Tu-who; 
Tu-whit, tu-who!”—a merry note, 
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
#END#
(from Twelfth Night)
When that I was and a little tiny boy, 
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
A foolish thing was but a toy, 
    For the rain it raineth every day. 

But when I came to man’s estate, 
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
’Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate, 
    For the rain it raineth every day. 

But when I came, alas! to wive, 
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
By swaggering could I never thrive, 
    For the rain it raineth every day. 

But when I came unto my beds, 
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
With toss-pots still had drunken heads, 
    For the rain it raineth every day. 

A great while ago the world begun, 
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 
But that’s all one, our play is done, 
    And we’ll strive to please you every day.
#END#
From fairest creatures we desire increase, 
That thereby beauty’s rose might never die, 
But as the riper should by time decrease, 
His tender heir might bear his memory; 
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, 
Feed’st thy light’s flame with self-substantial fuel, 
Making a famine where abundance lies, 
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. 
Though that art now the world’s fresh ornament 
And only herald to the gaudy spring, 
Within thine own bud buriest thy content, 
And, tender churl, mak’st waste in niggarding. 
   Pity the world, or else this glutton be, 
   To eat the world’s due, by the grave and thee.
#END#
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow 
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field, 
Thy youth’s proud livery, so gazed on now, 
Will be a tattered weed, of small worth held. 
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies— 
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days— 
To say within thine own deep-sunken eyes 
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise. 
How much more praise deserved thy beauty’s use 
If thou couldst answer "This fair child of mine 
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse", 
Proving his beauty by succession thine. 
    This were to be new made when thou art old, 
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.
#END#
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest, 
Now is the time that face should form another, 
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, 
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. 
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb 
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? 
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb 
Of his self-love, to stop posterity? 
Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee 
Calls back the lovely April of her prime; 
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, 
Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time. 
    But if thou live rememb’red not to be, 
    Die single, and thine image dies with thee.
#END#
When I do count the clock that tells the time, 
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night; 
When I behold the violet past prime, 
And sable curls ensilvered o’er with white; 
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves, 
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, 
And summer’s green all girded up in sheaves 
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard: 
Then of thy beauty do I question make 
That thou among the wastes of time must go, 
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake, 
And die as fast as they see others grow; 
And nothing 'gainst time’s scythe can make defence 
Save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence.
#END#
When I consider everything that grows 
Holds in perfection but a little moment, 
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows 
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment; 
When I perceive that men as plants increase, 
Cheered and check'd even by the selfsame sky, 
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, 
And wear their brave state out of memory; 
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay 
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, 
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay 
To change your day of youth to sullied night; 
And all in war with Time for love of you, 
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
#END#
Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day? 
Thou art more lovely and more temperate: 
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, 
And summer’s lease hath all too short a date; 
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, 
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd; 
And every fair from fair sometime declines, 
By chance or nature’s changing course untrimm'd;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade, 
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st; 
Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade, 
When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st: 
   So long as men can breathe or eyes can see, 
   So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
#END#
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws, 
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood; 
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, 
And burn the long-liv'd Phoenix in her blood; 
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets, 
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time, 
To the wide world and all her fading sweets; 
But I forbid thee one more heinous crime: 
O, carve not with the hours my love's fair brow, 
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen! 
Him in thy course untainted do allow 
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men. 
Yet do thy worst, old Time! Despite thy wrong 
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
#END#
A woman’s face with nature’s own hand painted 
Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion; 
A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquainted 
With shifting change as is false women’s fashion; 
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, 
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth; 
A man in hue, all hues in his controlling, 
Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth. 
And for a woman wert thou first created, 
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting, 
And by addition me of thee defeated 
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing. 
      But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure, 
      Mine be thy love and thy love’s use their treasure.
#END#
Let those who are in favour with their stars 
Of public honour and proud titles boast, 
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars, 
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most. 
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread 
But as the marigold at the sun's eye, 
And in themselves their pride lies buried, 
For at a frown they in their glory die. 
The painful warrior famoused for fight, 
After a thousand victories once foil'd, 
Is from the book of honour razed quite, 
And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd: 
Then happy I, that love and am beloved 
Where I may not remove nor be removed.
#END#
When, in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes, 
I all alone beweep my outcast state, 
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, 
And look upon myself and curse my fate, 
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, 
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed, 
Desiring this man’s art and that man’s scope, 
With what I most enjoy contented least; 
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, 
Haply I think on thee, and then my state, 
(Like to the lark at break of day arising 
From sullen earth) sings hymns at heaven’s gate; 
       For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings 
       That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
#END#
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought 
I summon up remembrance of things past, 
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought, 
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: 
Then can I drown an eye, unus'd to flow, 
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, 
And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe, 
And moan th' expense of many a vanish'd sight; 
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone, 
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er 
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, 
Which I new pay as if not paid before. 
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, 
All losses are restor'd, and sorrows end.
#END#
If thou survive my well-contented day, 
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover, 
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey 
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover, 
Compare them with the bettering of the time, 
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen, 
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, 
Exceeded by the height of happier men. 
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought: 
"Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age 
A dearer birth than this his love had brought, 
To march in ranks of better equipage: 
But since he died and poets better prove, 
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love."
#END#
Full many a glorious morning have I seen 
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye, 
Kissing with golden face the meadows green, 
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; 
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride 
With ugly rack on his celestial face 
And from the forlorn world his visage hide, 
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace. 
Even so my sun one early morn did shine 
With all-triumphant splendour on my brow; 
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine; 
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. 
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth; 
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
#END#
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done: 
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud, 
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, 
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. 
All men make faults, and even I in this, 
Authórizing thy trespass with compare, 
Myself corrupting salving thy amiss, 
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are: 
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense— 
Thy adverse party is thy advocate— 
And ‘gainst myself a lawful plea commence. 
Such civil war is in my love and hate, 
   That I an áccessory needs must be 
   To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
#END#
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all: 
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? 
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call— 
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more. 
Then if for my love thou my love receivest, 
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest; 
But yet be blamed if thou this self deceivest 
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest. 
I do forgive thy robb’ry, gentle thief, 
Although thou steal thee all my poverty; 
And yet love knows it is a greater grief 
To bear love’s wrong than hate’s known injury. 
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, 
    Kill me with spites, yet we must not be foes.
#END#
What is your substance, whereof are you made, 
That millions of strange shadows on you tend? 
Since every one hath, every one, one shade, 
And you, but one, can every shadow lend. 
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit 
Is poorly imitated after you; 
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, 
And you in Grecian tires are painted new. 
Speak of the spring and foison of the year: 
The one doth shadow of your beauty show, 
The other as your bounty doth appear; 
And you in every blessèd shape we know. 
    In all external grace you have some part, 
    But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
#END#
Not marble nor the gilded monuments 
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme, 
But you shall shine more bright in these contents 
Than unswept stone besmeared with sluttish time. 
When wasteful war shall statues overturn, 
And broils root out the work of masonry, 
Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn 
The living record of your memory. 
’Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity 
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room 
Even in the eyes of all posterity 
That wear this world out to the ending doom. 
    So, till the Judgement that yourself arise, 
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.
#END#
Being your slave, what should I do but tend 
Upon the hours and times of your desire? 
I have no precious time at all to spend, 
Nor services to do, till you require. 
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour 
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you. 
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour 
When you have bid your servant once adieu; 
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought 
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, 
But like a sad slave, stay and think of nought, 
Save, where you are how happy you make those. 
So true a fool is love that in your will 
Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
#END#
Like as the waves make towards the pebbl'd shore, 
So do our minutes hasten to their end; 
Each changing place with that which goes before, 
In sequent toil all forwards do contend. 
Nativity, once in the main of light, 
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd, 
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, 
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. 
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth 
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, 
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth, 
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow: 
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, 
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
#END#
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd 
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age; 
When sometime lofty towers I see down-ras'd 
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage; 
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain 
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, 
And the firm soil win of the wat'ry main, 
Increasing store with loss and loss with store; 
When I have seen such interchange of state, 
Or state itself confounded to decay; 
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate, 
That Time will come and take my love away. 
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose 
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.
#END#
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea 
But sad mortality o’er-sways their power, 
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, 
Whose action is no stronger than a flower? 
O, how shall summer’s honey breath hold out 
Against the wrackful siege of batt’ring days, 
When rocks impregnable are not so stout, 
Nor gates of steel so strong, but time decays? 
O fearful meditation! where, alack, 
Shall time’s best jewel from time’s chest lie hid? 
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? 
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? 
   O, none, unless this miracle have might, 
   That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
#END#
Tir'd with all these, for restful death I cry, 
As, to behold desert a beggar born, 
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity, 
And purest faith unhappily forsworn, 
And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd, 
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, 
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd, 
And strength by limping sway disabled, 
And art made tongue-tied by authority, 
And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill, 
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity, 
And captive good attending captain ill. 
Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone, 
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
#END#
No longer mourn for me when I am dead 
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell 
Give warning to the world that I am fled 
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell; 
Nay, if you read this line, remember not 
The hand that writ it; for I love you so, 
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, 
If thinking on me then should make you woe. 
O, if (I say) you look upon this verse, 
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay, 
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse, 
But let your love even with my life decay, 
Lest the wise world should look into your moan, 
And mock you with me after I am gone.
#END#
That time of year thou mayst in me behold 
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang 
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, 
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. 
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day 
As after sunset fadeth in the west, 
Which by and by black night doth take away, 
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest. 
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire 
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie, 
As the death-bed whereon it must expire, 
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by. 
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, 
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
#END#
Why is my verse so barren of new pride, 
So far from variation or quick change? 
Why with the time do I not glance aside 
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange? 
Why write I still all one, ever the same, 
And keep invention in a noted weed, 
That every word doth almost tell my name, 
Showing their, birth, and where they did proceed? 
O know, sweet love, I always write of you, 
And you and love are still my argument, 
So all my best is dressing old words new, 
Spending again what is already spent: 
   For as the sun is daily new and old, 
   So is my love still telling what is told.
#END#
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, 
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate. 
The Charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; 
My bonds in thee are all determinate. 
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting, 
And for that riches where is my deserving? 
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, 
And so my patent back again is swerving. 
Thy self thou gav’st, thy own worth then not knowing, 
Or me, to whom thou gav’st is, else mistaking, 
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, 
Comes home again, on better judgement making. 
   Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter: 
   In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
#END#
They that have power to hurt and will do none, 
That do not do the thing they most do show, 
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, 
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow: 
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces 
And husband nature's riches from expense; 
They are the lords and owners of their faces, 
Others but stewards of their excellence. 
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet 
Though to itself it only live and die, 
But if that flower with base infection meet, 
The basest weed outbraves his dignity: 
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; 
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
#END#
How like a winter hath my absence been 
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! 
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! 
What old December's bareness everywhere! 
And yet this time remov'd was summer's time, 
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase, 
Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime, 
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease: 
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me 
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit; 
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, 
And thou away, the very birds are mute; 
Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer 
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
#END#
From you have I been absent in the spring, 
When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim, 
Hath put a spirit of youth in everything, 
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him. 
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell 
Of different flowers in odour and in hue, 
Could make me any summer’s story tell, 
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: 
Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white, 
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; 
They were but sweet, but figures of delight 
Drawn after you, – you pattern of all those. 
    Yet seem’d it winter still, and, you away, 
    As with your shadow I with these did play.
#END#
To me, fair friend, you never can be old, 
For as you were when first your eye I eyed, 
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold 
Have from the forests shook three summers’ pride, 
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned 
In process of the seasons have I seen, 
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned, 
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. 
Ah, yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand, 
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived; 
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, 
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived: 
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred: 
Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.
#END#
When in the chronicle of wasted time 
I see descriptions of the fairest wights, 
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme 
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, 
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, 
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, 
I see their antique pen would have express'd 
Even such a beauty as you master now. 
So all their praises are but prophecies 
Of this our time, all you prefiguring; 
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes, 
They had not skill enough your worth to sing: 
For we, which now behold these present days, 
Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
#END#
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul 
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, 
Can yet the lease of my true love control, 
Suppos'd as forfeit to a confin'd doom. 
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd 
And the sad augurs mock their own presage; 
Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd 
And peace proclaims olives of endless age. 
Now with the drops of this most balmy time 
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, 
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme, 
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes; 
And thou in this shalt find thy monument, 
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
#END#
O! never say that I was false of heart, 
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify. 
As easy might I from myself depart 
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie: 
That is my home of love; if I have ranged, 
Like him that travels, I return again, 
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, 
So that myself bring water for my stain. 
Never believe, though in my nature reigned 
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, 
That it could so preposterously be stained, 
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good; 
   For nothing this wide universe I call, 
   Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.
#END#
Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there 
And made myself a motley to the view, 
Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, 
Made old offences of affections new. 
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth 
Askance and strangely: but, by all above, 
These blenches gave my heart another youth, 
And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love. 
Now all is done, have what shall have no end! 
Mine appetite, I never more will grind 
On newer proof, to try an older friend, 
A god in love, to whom I am confin'd. 
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, 
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
#END#
O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide, 
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, 
That did not better for my life provide 
Than public means which public manners breeds. 
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, 
And almost thence my nature is subdu'd 
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand. 
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd; 
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink 
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; 
No bitterness that I will bitter think, 
Nor double penance, to correct correction. 
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye 
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
#END#
Let me not to the marriage of true minds 
Admit impediments. Love is not love 
Which alters when it alteration finds, 
Or bends with the remover to remove. 
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark 
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; 
It is the star to every wand'ring bark, 
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. 
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks 
Within his bending sickle's compass come; 
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, 
But bears it out even to the edge of doom. 
If this be error and upon me prov'd, 
I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.
#END#
’Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed
When not to be receives reproach of being, 
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing.
For why should others’ false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies, 
Which in their wills count bad that I think good?
No, I am that I am; and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own:
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown, 
    Unless this general evil they maintain:
    All men are bad and in their badness reign.
#END#
No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondering at the present nor the past;
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by that continual haste.
   This I do vow, and this shall ever be:
   I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.
#END#
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy pow’r 
Dost hold time’s fickle glass his sickle hour, 
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st 
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow’st— 
In nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, 
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back, 
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill 
May time disgrace, and wretched minute kill. 
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure; 
She may detain but not still keep her treasure. 
   Her audit, though delayed, answered must be, 
   And her quietus is to render thee.
#END#
Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame 
Is lust in action; and till action, lust 
Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody, full of blame, 
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust, 
Enjoyed no sooner but despisèd straight, 
Past reason hunted; and, no sooner had 
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait 
On purpose laid to make the taker mad; 
Mad in pursuit and in possession so, 
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme; 
A bliss in proof and proved, a very woe; 
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream. 
    All this the world well knows; yet none knows well 
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
#END#
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; 
Coral is far more red than her lips' red; 
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; 
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head. 
I have seen roses damasked, red and white, 
But no such roses see I in her cheeks; 
And in some perfumes is there more delight 
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. 
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know 
That music hath a far more pleasing sound; 
I grant I never saw a goddess go; 
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground. 
   And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare 
   As any she belied with false compare.
#END#
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me:
Is’t not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet’st friend must be?
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed;
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed. 
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, 
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
Whoe’er keeps me, let my heart be his guard:
Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail.
    And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee, 
    Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
#END#
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy Will, 
And Will to boot, and Will in overplus; 
More than enough am I that vex thee still, 
To thy sweet will making addition thus. 
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, 
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? 
Shall will in others seem right gracious, 
And in my will no fair acceptance shine? 
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, 
And in abundance addeth to his store; 
So thou being rich in Will add to thy Will 
One will of mine, to make thy large Will more. 
   Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill; 
   Think all but one, and me in that one Will.
#END#
When my love swears that she is made of truth, 
I do believe her, though I know she lies, 
That she might think me some untutored youth, 
Unlearnèd in the world’s false subtleties. 
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, 
Although she knows my days are past the best, 
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue: 
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed. 
But wherefore says she not she is unjust? 
And wherefore say not I that I am old? 
Oh, love’s best habit is in seeming trust, 
And age in love loves not to have years told. 
    Therefore I lie with her and she with me, 
    And in our faults by lies we flattered be.
#END#
O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Use power with power, and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lov’st elsewhere; but in my sight, 
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside;
What need’st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my o’erpressed defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah, my love well knows
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries—
    Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
    Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.
#END#
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, 
For they in thee a thousand errors note; 
But ‘tis my heart that loves what they despise, 
Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote; 
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue’s tune delighted, 
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone, 
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited 
To any sensual feast with thee alone: 
But my five wits nor my five senses can 
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, 
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man, 
Thy proud heart’s slave and vassal wretch to be. 
   Only my plague thus far I count my gain, 
   That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
#END#
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving.
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine, 
Robbed others’ beds’ revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov’st those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows, 
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be. 
    If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
    By self-example mayst thou be denied.
#END#
Two loves I have of comfort and despair, 
Which like two spirits do suggest me still 
The better angel is a man right fair, 
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill. 
To win me soon to hell, my female evil 
Tempteth my better angel from my side, 
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, 
Wooing his purity with her foul pride. 
And, whether that my angel be turn’d fiend, 
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell, 
But being both from me both to each friend, 
I guess one angel in another’s hell. 
   Yet this shall I ne’er know, but live in doubt, 
   Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
#END#
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, 
[......] these rebel powers that thee array, 
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, 
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay? 
Why so large cost, having so short a lease, 
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? 
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess, 
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? 
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss 
And let that pine to aggravate thy store; 
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; 
Within be fed, without be rich no more. 
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, 
And, Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
#END#
My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th’ uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, 
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care, 
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen’s are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed:
    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
    Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
#END#
(from As You Like It, spoken by Jacques)
All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms;
And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress’ eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lin’d,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper’d pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side;
His youthful hose, well sav’d, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion;
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
#END#
(from Julius Caesar, spoken by Marc Antony)
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is oft interred with their bones;
So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious:
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answer’d it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest–
For Brutus is an honourable man;
So are they all, all honourable men–
Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me:
But Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.
You all did see that on the Lupercal
I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And, sure, he is an honourable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause:
What cause withholds you then, to mourn for him?
O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause till it come back to me.
#END#
(from Macbeth, spoken by Macbeth)
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
 The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
 I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
 Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
 To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
 A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
 Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
 I see thee yet, in form as palpable
 As this which now I draw.
 Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going;
 And such an instrument I was to use.
 Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,
 Or else worth all the rest; I see thee still,
 And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
 Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
 It is the bloody business which informs
 Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld
 Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
 The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates
 Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder,
 Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
 Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace.
 With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
 Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
 Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
 Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
 And take the present horror from the time,
 Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives:
 Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
                                    [a bell rings]
 I go, and it is done; the bell invites me.
 Hear it not, Duncan; for it is a knell
 That summons thee to heaven or to hell.
#END#
(from Richard II, spoken by King Richard)
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
Let’s talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;
Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,
Let’s choose executors and talk of wills:
And yet not so, for what can we bequeath
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke’s,
And nothing can we call our own but death
And that small model of the barren earth
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
For God’s sake, let us sit upon the ground
And tell sad stories of the death of kings;
How some have been deposed; some slain in war,
Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;
Some poison’d by their wives: some sleeping kill’d;
All murder’d: for within the hollow crown
That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
To monarchize, be fear’d and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this flesh which walls about our life,
Were brass impregnable, and humor’d thus
Comes at the last and with a little pin
Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn reverence: throw away respect,
Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with bread like you, feel want,
Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a king?
#END#
(from Richard III, spoken by Gloucester)
Now is the winter of our discontent
 Made glorious summer by this sun of York;
 And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
 In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
 Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
 Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
 Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
 Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
 Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front;
 And now, instead of mounting barded steeds
 To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
 He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
 To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
 But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
 Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
 I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty
 To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
 I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
 Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
 Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time
 Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
 And that so lamely and unfashionable
 That dogs bark at me as I halt by them;
 Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
 Have no delight to pass away the time,
 Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
 And descant on mine own deformity:
 And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
 To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
 I am determined to prove a villain
 And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
 Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
 By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams,
 To set my brother Clarence and the king
 In deadly hate the one against the other:
 And if King Edward be as true and just
 As I am subtle, false and treacherous,
 This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up,
 About a prophecy, which says that 'G'
 Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
 Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here
 Clarence comes.
#END#
(from Romeo and Juliet, spoken by Juliet)
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name.
Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love
And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.
‘Tis but thy name that is my enemy:
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What’s Montague? It is nor hand nor foot
Nor arm nor face nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O be some other name.
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call’d,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.
#END#
(from Henry V, spoken by King Henry)
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more;
 Or close the wall up with our English dead.
 In peace there's nothing so becomes a man
 As modest stillness and humility:
 But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
 Then imitate the action of the tiger;
 Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
 Disguise fair nature with hard-favour'd rage;
 Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
 Let pry through the portage of the head
 Like the brass cannon; let the brow o'erwhelm it
 As fearfully as doth a galled rock
 O'erhang and jutty his confounded base,
 Swill'd with the wild and wasteful ocean.
 Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide,
 Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit
 To his full height. On, on, you noblest English.
 Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof!
 Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
 Have in these parts from morn till even fought
 And sheathed their swords for lack of argument:
 Dishonour not your mothers; now attest
 That those whom you call'd fathers did beget you.
 Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
 And teach them how to war. And you, good yeoman,
 Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
 The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
 That you are worth your breeding; which I doubt not;
 For there is none of you so mean and base,
 That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.
 I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
 Straining upon the start. The game's afoot:
 Follow your spirit, and upon this charge
 Cry 'God for Harry, England, and Saint George!'
#END#
(from Macbeth, spoken by Lady Macbeth)
The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full
Of direst cruelty! Make thick my blood,
Stop up th' access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts,
And take my milk for gall, you murd'ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark,
To cry "Hold, hold!"
#END#
(from Henry V, spoken by King Henry)
This day is called the feast of Crispian:
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when the day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
And say ‘To-morrow is Saint Crispian:’
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
And say ‘These wounds I had on Crispin’s day.’
Old men forget: yet all shall be forgot,
But he’ll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day: then shall our names.
Familiar in his mouth as household words
Harry the king, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remember’d.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remember’d;
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition:
And gentlemen in England now a-bed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.
#END#
Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
A great-sized monster of ingratitudes:
Those scraps are good deeds past; which are devour'd
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon 
As done: perseverance, dear my lord,
Keeps honour bright: to have done is to hang
Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail
In monumental mockery. Take the instant way;
For honour travels in a strait so narrow,
Where one but goes abreast: keep then the path;
For emulation hath a thousand sons
That one by one pursue: if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,
Like to an enter'd tide, they all rush by
And leave you hindmost;
Or like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
O'er-run and trampled on: then what they do in present,
Though less than yours in past, must o'ertop yours; 
For time is like a fashionable host
That slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand,
And with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer: welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. O, let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was;
For beauty, wit,
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all 
To envious and calumniating time.
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And give to dust that is a little gilt 
More laud than gilt o'er-dusted.
The present eye praises the present object.
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye 
Than what not stirs. The cry went once on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive
And case thy reputation in thy tent;
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late, 
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves
And drave great Mars to faction.
#END#
(from Hamlet, spoken by Hamlet)
To be, or not to be, that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And by opposing end them. To die—to sleep,
No more; and by a sleep to say we end
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to: 'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;
To sleep, perchance to dream—ay, there's the rub:
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause—there's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th'oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of dispriz'd love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th'unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovere'd country, from whose bourn
No traveller returns, puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.
#END#
(from Macbeth, spoken by Macbeth)
Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
#END#
When daisies pied and violets blue 
   And lady-smocks all silver-white 
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue 
   Do paint the meadows with delight, 
The cuckoo then, on every tree, 
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 
                         Cuckoo; 
Cuckoo, cuckoo: Oh word of fear, 
Unpleasing to a married ear! 

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws, 
   And merry larks are plowmen’s clocks, 
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws, 
   And maidens bleach their summer smocks, 
The cuckoo then, on every tree, 
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 
                         Cuckoo; 
Cuckoo, cuckoo: Oh word of fear, 
Unpleasing to a married ear!
#END#
Let the bird of loudest lay 
On the sole Arabian tree 
Herald sad and trumpet be, 
To whose sound chaste wings obey. 

But thou shrieking harbinger, 
Foul precurrer of the fiend, 
Augur of the fever's end, 
To this troop come thou not near. 

From this session interdict 
Every fowl of tyrant wing, 
Save the eagle, feather'd king; 
Keep the obsequy so strict. 

Let the priest in surplice white, 
That defunctive music can, 
Be the death-divining swan, 
Lest the requiem lack his right. 

And thou treble-dated crow, 
That thy sable gender mak'st 
With the breath thou giv'st and tak'st, 
'Mongst our mourners shalt thou go. 

Here the anthem doth commence: 
Love and constancy is dead; 
Phoenix and the Turtle fled 
In a mutual flame from hence. 

So they lov'd, as love in twain 
Had the essence but in one; 
Two distincts, division none: 
Number there in love was slain. 

Hearts remote, yet not asunder; 
Distance and no space was seen 
'Twixt this Turtle and his queen: 
But in them it were a wonder. 

So between them love did shine 
That the Turtle saw his right 
Flaming in the Phoenix' sight: 
Either was the other's mine. 

Property was thus appalled 
That the self was not the same; 
Single nature's double name 
Neither two nor one was called. 

Reason, in itself confounded, 
Saw division grow together, 
To themselves yet either neither, 
Simple were so well compounded; 

That it cried, "How true a twain 
Seemeth this concordant one! 
Love has reason, reason none, 
If what parts can so remain." 

Whereupon it made this threne 
To the Phoenix and the Dove, 
Co-supremes and stars of love, 
As chorus to their tragic scene: 

Beauty, truth, and rarity, 
Grace in all simplicity, 
Here enclos'd, in cinders lie. 

Death is now the Phoenix' nest, 
And the Turtle's loyal breast 
To eternity doth rest, 

Leaving no posterity: 
'Twas not their infirmity, 
It was married chastity. 

Truth may seem but cannot be; 
Beauty brag but 'tis not she; 
Truth and beauty buried be. 

To this urn let those repair 
That are either true or fair; 
For these dead birds sigh a prayer.
#END#
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, 
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Between whose hills her head entombed is;
    Where like a virtuous monument she lies,
    To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.

Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green coverlet, whose perfect white
Showed like an April daisy on the grass,
With pearly sweat resembling dew of night.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
    And canopied in darkness sweetly lay
    Till they might open to adorn the day.

Her hair like golden threads played with her breath
O modest wantons, wanton modesty!
Showing life’s triumph in the map of death,
And death’s dim look in life’s mortality.
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify
    As if between them twain there were no strife,
    But that life lived in death, and death in life.

Her breasts like ivory globes circled with blue,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquerèd,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honourèd.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred,
    Who like a foul usurper went about
    From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his willful eye he tired.
With more than admiration he admired
    Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
    Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.

As the grim lion fawneth o’er his prey
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So o’er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
Slacked, not suppressed; for, standing by her side,
    His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
    Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins.

And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting.
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor children’s tears nor mothers’ groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting.
    Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
    Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.

His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, marched on to make his stand
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land,
    Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
    Left their round turrets destitute and pale.

They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset
And fright her with confusion of their cries.
She, much amazed, breaks ope her locked-up eyes,
    Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
    Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled.

Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking.
What terror ‘tis! but she, in worser taking,
    From sleep disturbèd, heedfully doth view
    The sight which makes supposèd terror true.

Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies.
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Quick-shifting antics ugly in her eyes.
Such shadows are the weak brain’s forgeries,
    Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
    In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

His hand, that yet remains upon her breast
(Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!)
May feel her heart (poor citizen) distressed,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
    This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
    To make the breach and enter this sweet city.
#END#